npage for fatcat

.de Vb \" Begin verbatim text
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve \" End verbatim text
.ft R
.fi
..

.\" Contact g.passault@gmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH man 1 "07 August 2014" "1.0.5" "fatcat man page"
.SH NAME
fatcat \- FAT filesystem explore, extract, repair, and forensic tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
fatcat disk.img [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
fatcat is a standalone tool that allow you to explore, extract, repair and forensic FAT filesystems
It currently supports FAT12, FAT16 and FAT32.
.SH OPTIONS
You should provide an option to fatcat, or you will get the help menu

.PP
\fB\-i\fP
.RS 4
Display information about the FAT filesystem
.RE

.PP
\fB\-l path [\-d]\fP
.RS 4
Lists the entries of the directory \fBpath\fP
If \fB\-d\fP is present, deleted files will be listed.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-L cluster [\-d]\fP
.RS 4
Same as \fB\-l\fP, but using the \fBcluster\fP cluster number as source.
If \fB\-d\fP is present, deleted files will be listed.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-r path\fP
.RS 4
Reads the file given by \fbpath\fP
.RE

.PP
\fB\-R cluster [\-s size]\fP
.RS 4
Reads the file starting at the \fBcluster\fP cluster number. If \fBsize\fP is provied,
this will only read \fBsize\fP bytes.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-x target [\-c cluster] [\-d]\fP
.RS 4
Extract all the files to the \fBtarget\fP directory. If you provide a cluster with
\fB\-c\fP, the extract will start with the given cluster instead that the root directory.
If \fB\-d\fP is present, deleted files will be extracted.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-z, \-S\fP
.RS 4
\fB\-z\fP will write all your unallocated data to zero, and \fB\-S\fP will write all your
unallocated data to random bytes. this will for instance cause your deleted files to
be unreadable.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-@ cluster\fP
.RS 4
This will display information about the given \fBcluster\fP. It will display its address, which
is the offset of the cluster in the image, and the FAT entries (next cluster, unallocated
or end of cluster)
.RE

.PP
\fB\-2\fP
.RS 4
Compares the two file allocation tables and produce a full diff. This can be used to check that
the disk is not corrupted, and have a look to it before trying to merge it with \fB\-m\fP.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-m\fP
.RS 4
Merges the two file allocation tables. This will only keep the allocated entries from on or the
other table.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-b backupfile [\-t table]\fP
.RS 4
Backups your FAT tables to the \fBbackupfile\fP file. You can specify with \fB\-t\fP the 
table(s) you want to backup (0:both, 1:first, 2:second). You can then apply the FATs
using \fB\-p\fP.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-p backupfile [\-t table]\fP
.RS 4
Patch your FAT table using \fBbackupfile\fP previously backuped file (using \fB\-b\fP).
You can use \fB\-t\fP to specify the table(s) you want to patch (0: both, 1:first, 2:second).
.RE

.PP
\fB\-w cluster \-v value [\-t table]\fP
.RS 4
Writes the \fBcluster\fP entry in the FAT to \fBvalue\fP. You can specify the table using
\fB-t\fP (0:both, 1:first, 2: second).
.RE

.PP
\fB\-o\fP
.RS 4
Search for orphaned files on the disk. This will produce a log listing files, directories
and entries that are found. See \fB\-L\fP, \fB\-R\fP and \fB\-x\fP to access those files and
directories.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-f\fP
.RS 4
Walks the directories from the root (/) and try to fix unallocated files and directories
FAT table.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-e path [\-c cluster] [\-s size]\fP
.RS 4
Display information about the entry of the \fBpath\fP file or directory. You can edit its
cluster or size reference using \fB\-c\fP and \fB\-s\fP.
.RE

.PP
\fB\-k cluster\fP
.RS 4
Walks the directories from the root (/) and search an entry referencing the given \fBcluster\fP.
.RE

.SH EXAMPLES
You can explore your disk using \fB\-l\fP:

$ fatcat disk.img \-l /

And enter directories:

$ fatcat disk.img \-l /some/dir/

You can read a file using \fB\-R\fP:

$ fatcat disk.img \-r /hello.txt
Hello world!
$ fatcat disk.img \-r /picture.png > out.png

You can also read files, including deleted ones:

$ fatat disk.img \-l / \-d

And extract all the files to a target directory:

$ mkdir output/
$ fatcat disk.img \-x output/

Let's have a look at the listing:

.Vb 5
\& $ fatcat hello-world.img \-l /
\& Listing path /
\& Directory cluster: 2
\& f 25/10/2013 13:30:06  hello.txt                      c=3 s=13 (13B)
\& d 25/10/2013 13:30:46  files/                         c=4
.Ve

The cluster of the \fBfiles\fP directory is \fB4\fP, this means that we
can list it with \fB\-L 4\fP:

.Vb 5
\& $ fatcat hello-world.img \-L 4
\& Listing cluster 4
\& Directory cluster: 4
\& d 25/10/2013 13:30:22  ./                             c=4
\& d 25/10/2013 13:30:22  ../                            c=0
\& f 25/10/2013 13:30:46  other_file.txt                 c=5 s=29 (29B)
.Ve

The cluster of the \fBother_file.txt\fP file is 5, and its size is 29bytes,
we can then read it using \fB\-R 5 \-s 29\fP:

.Vb 5
\& $ fatcat hello-world.img \-R 5 \-s 29
\& Hello!
\& This is another file!
.Ve

For more examples and tutorials, have a look at the \fBfatcat\fP tutorial and examples
at: <\fBhttps://github.com/Gregwar/fatcat/blob/master/docs/index.md\fR>

.SH SEE ALSO
fatattr(1), mkdosfs(8)
.SH BUGS
No known bugs.
.SH AUTHOR
Grégoire Passault (g.passault@gmail.com)
